
12

Automatic Zoom
I a rebel soul 
I a rebel soul 
I a rebel soul 
I a rebel soul 
Give me light to brighten up my day 
Give me health and strength so I can make, my, my own, own way 
As the darkness of the night 
Fades away, yellow sun begins to shine 
I see my freedom over yonder 
But they steal it away 
Yes, they steal it away 
So I a rebel soul 
I a rebel soul 
 
To save my face, shave of disgrace 
I keep laughing like a clown 
Stripped of all identity, I am bare beneath the stares 
But you can't walk with your head on down 
For you just can't see 
Which way to go? 
Which way to go? 
So I a rebel soul 
I a rebel, a rebel 
 
Though transgression finds me, I'm confused by the (?) 
My captors mesmerize me all to, to bring me down 
Still we are the children of the father, and he expects I and I 
To push on through, to push on through 
Push on through 
So the real vanity I can find, so jah, jah 
And you got to face reality, the bottom will be dread, heavy like lead 
And the jester will run out of time 
Your back's against the wall, and they don't mind if you fall 
Look they'll use you, and abuse you, try their best to confuse you, so 
 
Wavin’ Flag lyrics: 
When I get older, I will be stronger, 
They'll call me freedom, just like a Waving Flag, 
And then it goes back, and then it goes back, 
And then it goes back 
 
Born to a throne, stronger than Rome 
but Violent prone, poor people zone, 
But it's my home, all I have known, 
Where I got grown, streets we would roam. 
But out of the darkness, I came the farthest, 
Among the hardest survival. 
Learn from these streets, it can be bleak, 
Except no defeat, surrender retreat, 
 
So we struggling, fighting to eat and 
We wondering when we'll be free, 
So we patiently wait, for that fateful day, 
It's not far away, so for now we say 
 
 
So many wars, settling scores, 
Bringing us promises, leaving us poor, 
I heard them say, love is the way, 
Love is the answer, that's what they say, 
But look how they treat us, Make us believers, 
We fight their battles, then they deceive us, 
Try to control us, they couldn't hold us, 
Cause we just move forward like Buffalo Soldiers. 
 
But we struggling, fighting to eat, 
And we wondering, when we'll be free 
So we patiently wait, for that faithful day, 
It's not far away, but for now we say, 
 
 
When I get older, when I get older 
I will be stronger, just like a Waving Flag, 
 
 
 
Smokestack lightnin lyrics: 
Whoa, smokestack lightnin' 
Shinin' just like gold 
Why don't you hear me cryin'? 
A-whoo-hoo, a-whoo-hoo, whoo 
Whoa-oh, tell me, baby 
What's the matter here? 
Why don't you hear me cryin'? 
Whoo-hoo, whoo-hoo, whoo 
Whoa-oh, tell me, baby 
Where did you stay last night? 
Why don't you hear me cryin'? 
Whoo-hoo, whoo-hoo, whoo 
Whoa-oh, stop your train 
Let a poor boy ride 
Why don't you hear me cryin'? 
Whoo-hoo, whoo-hoo, whoo 
Whoa-oh, fare-you-well 
Never see a you no more 
Why don't you hear me cryin'? 
Whoo-hoo, whoo-hoo, whoo 
Whoa-oh, who been here baby since 
I, I been gone a little bitty boy? 
Girl, be on 
A-whoo-hoo, whoo-hoo, whoo 
 
Strange fruit lyrics:  
Southern trees bear a strange fruit 
Blood on the leaves and blood at the root 
Black bodies swingin' in the Southern breeze 
Strange fruit hangin' from the poplar trees 
Pastoral scene of the gallant South 
The bulgin' eyes and the twisted mouth 
Scent of magnolias sweet and fresh 
Then the sudden smell of burnin' flesh 
Here is a fruit for the crows to pluck 
For the rain to gather 
For the wind to suck 
For the sun to rot 
For the tree to drop 
Here is a strange and bitter crop 
 
Londons calling:  
London Calling, to the far away towns 
Now war is declared, and battle come down 
London Calling, to the underworld 
Come out of the cupboard, you boys and girls 
London Calling, now don't look to us 
Phoney Beatlemania has bitten the dust 
London Calling, see we ain't got no swing 
Except for the ring of that truncheon thing 
 
The Ice Age is coming, the sun zooming in 
Meltdown expected, the wheat is growing thin 
Engines stop running, but I have no fear 
'Cause London is drowning, and I live by the river 
 
London Calling, to the imitation zone 
Forget it, brother, you can go it alone 
London Calling, to the zombies of death 
Quit holding out and draw another breath 
London Calling, and I don't wanna shout 
But while we were talking, I saw you nodding out 
London Calling, see we ain't got no highs 
Except for that one with the yellowy eyes 
 
The Ice Age is coming, the sun zooming in 
Engines stop running, the wheat is growing thin 
A nuclear error, but I have no fear 
'Cause London is drowning, and I live by the river 
 
The Ice Age is coming, the sun zooming in 
Engines stop running, the wheat is growing thin 
A nuclear error, but I have no fear 
'Cause London is drowning, and I live by the river 
 
Now get this... 
 
London Calling, yes, I was there too 
And you know what they said? Well, some of it was true 
London Calling, at the top of the dial 
And after all this, won't you give me a smile? 
 
London Calling 
 
And I never felt so much I like 
 
Im leaving lyrics: 
“...I'm leaving, on the next plane 
I don't know when I'll be back again 
Kiss me and smile for me 
Tell me that you'll wait for me 
Hold me, like you know I'll never go 
Even though you know I will 
I'm a travelling man 
moving through places 
space and time 
got a lot of things I got to do 
but God willing I'm coming back to you 
my baby-boo 
I'm a travelling man 
moving through places 
space and time” 
gotta lotta things i got to do 
but God willing I'm coming back to you 
my baby-boo 
I'm leaving... 
 
...Cause this thing called rhyming, no different than coal mining 
we both on assignment, to unearth the diamond 
while you start climbing in 'em, I start shining 
you be struggling and striving 
and they think you prime timing 
maintain and keep silent 
make note and observation 
this confrontation 
this is the daily operation 
my concentration 
stay focussed on my recitation 
bout to reach my destination 
with no pause or hesitation 
baby make the preparation 
cause this ain't no recreation 
this is pro-ball 
and we lettin' you know y'all 
at the show y'all 
Doing this for doe y'all 
get the phone call 
and I'm ready to blow y'all 
bout to go y'all 
been a pleasure to know y'all 
and I'm lettin' you know that... 
...All over the world, we go 
DC All over the world, we go 
VA All over the world, we go 
The Cakalacks All over the world, we go 
London All over the world, we go 
Japan we go over the world, we go 
Paris we go over the world we go 
 
Parting glass lyrics: 
Of all the money ere I had, I spent it in good company, 
And all the harm I’ve ever done, alas was to none but me. 
And all I’ve done for want of wit, to memory now I can’t recall. 
So fill me to the parting glass, goodnight and joy be with you all. 
If I had money enough to spend and leisure time to sit awhile, 
There is a fair maid in this town who sorely has my heart beguiled. 
Her rosy cheeks and ruby lips, I own she has my heart in thrall. 
So fill me to the parting glass – goodnight, and joy be with you all. 
Of all the comrades ere I had, they’re sorry for my going away, 
And all the sweethearts ere I had , they wish me one more day to stay, 
But since it falls unto my lot that I should go and you should not, 
I’ll gently rise and softly call, goodnight and joy be with you all. 
 
The revolution will not be televised lyrics: 
You will not be able to stay home, brother 
You will not be able to plug in, turn on and cop out 
You will not be able to lose yourself on skag and 
Skip out for beer during commercials 
Because the revolution will not be televised 
The revolution will not be televised 
The revolution will not be brought to you by Xerox 
In four parts without commercial interruptions 
The revolution will not show you pictures of Nixon 
Blowing a bugle and leading a charge by John Mitchell 
General Abrams and Spiro Agnew 
To eat hog maws confiscated from a Harlem sanctuary 
The revolution will not be televised... 
...There will be no pictures of pigs shooting down 
Brothers on the instant replay 
There will be no pictures of pigs shooting down 
Brothers on the instant replay 
 
The revolution will not be right back 
After a message about a white tornado, white lightning or white people 
You will not have to worry about a dove in your bedroom 
The tiger in your tank or the giant in your toilet bowl 
The revolution will not go better with Coke 
The revolution will not fight germs that may cause bad breath 
The revolution will put you in the driver's seat 
The revolution will not be televised, will not be televised 
Will not be televised, will not be televised 
The revolution will be no re-run, brothers 
The revolution will be live 
 
My war lyrics: 
Why you're one of them? 
You say that you're my friend 
But you're one of them 
You don't wanna see me live 
You don't want me to give 
'Cause you're one of them 
My war, you're one of them 
You say that you're my friend 
But you're 
Why you're one of them? 
You say that you're my friend 
But you're one of them 
Well, I might have known what a friend is 
All I know is what you've done 
You're one of them 
My war, you're one of them 
You say that you're my friend 
But you're one of them 
I have a prediction, it lives in my brain 
It's with me every day, it drives me insane 
I feel it in my heart that if I have a gun 
I feel it in my heart, I'd wanna kill some 
I feel it in my heart, I'd wanna kill some 
Why you're one of them 
You say that you're my friend 
But you're one of them 
You don't wanna see me live 
You don't want me to give 
'Cause you're one of them 
My war, you're one of them 
You say that you're my friend 
But you're one of them 
You're one of them fucker! 
 